---
title: Emulating the DREAM keypad
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - blog/draft
tags:
  - M6800
  - DREAM 6800
  - Emulation
synced: true
published: false
---
Now that we know how the PIA works, it's time to get the DREAM's keypad working.
<!--more-->

This post is part of a series on writing an emulator for the DREAM 6800 computer. Read [the DREAM 6800 posts](/tags/#dream-6800) and look at [the emulator's repository](https://github.com/tobiasvl/drom).
{: .notice--info}

In the previous post, I figured out how the PIA, or the MC6820/MC6821 Peripheral Interface Adapter, works. Now it's time to use that knowledge to get keypad input working in my emulator.

PIA on the DREAM 6800
---------------------

The DREAM 6800 has one PIA chip. It exposes four memory addresses to the MPU, `$8010`–`$8013`. Three peripheral devices are hooked up to the PIA: The hexadecimal keypad, the cassette tape drive, and the speaker.

The speaker isn't terribly important; on a stock DREAM it can only beep at a single frequency, which it does when you press a key in the CHIPOS monitor program, or when a program/game tells it to. However, it's also easy to implement, so let's do it.

The tape drive was used to save and load programs from/into RAM When loading programs or games into the DREAM, one would painstakingly type them in manually, either when making them oneself or transcribing them from listings in _Electronics Australia_ or the _DREAMER_ newsletter. Afterwards, one would probably want to save them to tape. So the tape drive was important back then; in the DRÖM emulator we can dump data into RAM in an instant, so we'll postpone implementing the tape drive. Sounds complicated.

The most important peripheral that we want now is, of course, the hexadecimal keypad. We can't do much with the DREAM without a keypad!


Initially, I only read the Electronics Australia description of how the keypad worked. It might just be me, but I initially found it confusing: 

> Operation of the hex keypad is very simple from a hardware point of view. Normally, the rows (PA4 to PA7) are outputs, held LOW, while the columns (PA0 to PA3) are inputs, held HIGH by internal pullups. If any key is pressed, one column must go LOW causing a rising edge at CA1. The software encoding routine then can determine which column went LOW, then reverse the roles (ie data directions) of the rows/columns to determine which row is active.

I don't know much about hardware, and the EA article is meant for people who built their own computers from off-the-shelf parts. I didn't understand where these "internal pullups" were located.

DREAMER issue #10 explains the PIA in the DREAM 6800 in a much clearer way, at least to me. I wish I stumbled upon it sooner!

Given the above information and the schematic of the keypad, I initially made the emulator's keys send the following data to the PIA:

This seemed correct to me. Each key sends one byte, where the most significant nibble is the row data, and the least significant nibble is the column data. The row is held low, while the column is held high; so, inverted.

Except that's not what happens.
